---
layout: post
title: A Complete Analysis of Every NBA Team's Shooting Percentage by Quarter from 1996 to Present Day
---

I previously discussed the success of the Golden State Warriors in the third quarter, and calculated the shooting percentage by quarter for all 30 NBA teams in the combined 2017-18 and 2018-19 regular seasons. This exercise got me thinking: What teams in the history of the NBA can match (or even surpass) the Warriors' shooting dominance of the third quarter? Unfortunately, complete data only goes back to the 1996-97 season, which means that all-time great teams such as the "Showtime Lakers" or Larry Bird's Celtics were not able to be included in this analysis. Despite this, the data analysis of teams from 1996-97 to today includes ten of the top twenty seasons by team offensive rating, and [about half of the top 50 seasons measured by team offensive rating](https://www.basketball-reference.com/play-index/tiny.fcgi?id=fyWGS).

The process I used to gather and analyze this data was the same one I used on the data from the combined 2017-19 NBA seasons, [available here](https://github.com/joshnoonan/QuarterShooting). For each NBA season, I calculated a mean shooting percentage and standard deviation for each quarter, then calcuated each team's z-score for that corresponding quarter. The idea behind computing z-score is that it provides a way to normalize across eras for the changing offensive game in the NBA. Shooting percentage has risen over the past 22 seasons, and thus it is important to compare the performance of individual teams only to the direct context that they existed in. Computing this for every team in every quarter for the past 22 seasons generated 2,729 data points. Of those 2,729 data points, 1,344 saw teams with positive z-scores (roughly 50%), with overall z-scores ranging from -3.106 (yikes!) to 3.298.

The team able to lay claim to the greatest standardized shooting performance in a quarter would be the 1996-97 Utah Jazz. This Jazz team, led by MVP Karl Malone and star point guard John Stockton, finished first place in the Western Conference and advanced to the NBA Finals only to lose to the Jordan-led Chicago Bulls. This Jazz team shot 53.94% in the third quarter, the highest recorded shooting percentage in a quarter for any team from 1996 to the most recent NBA season. The Warriors greatest mark in the third quarter was a 52.01% shooting percentage in the 2017-2018 season, a feat that only produced a 2.835 z-score due to the league-wide improvement in offense over the past two decades. This Jazz times was undoubtedly capable enough to win an NBA title, and likely would have won at least one title if not for Michael Jordan and his Bulls.

Of the top 10 teams ranked by greatest z-score, all but one (the unfortunate 2008-2009 Phoenix Suns who finished 9th in the Western Conference) qualified for the playoffs. Four of these teams either advanced to or won the NBA Finals, with three reaching their respective conference semifinals, and two reaching their conference finals. The teams found in the upper tiers of this ranking usually demonstrated success, as they not only qualified for the playoffs but typically won at least one playoff series. We can see that the teams constituting the best shooting quarters in NBA history since 1996-97 typically have great offenses overall, and that their magnificent performance in one quarter is not an abberation on an otherwise lackluster offense. The 2008-09 Phoenix Suns were done in by their miserable defense, posting the 40th worst season by team defensive rating since 1996-97 as calculated by [Basketball Reference](https://www.basketball-reference.com/play-index/tsl_finder.cgi?request=1&match=single&type=team_totals&year_min=1997&lg_id=NBA&c1stat=def_rtg&c1comp=gt&order_by=def_rtg).

The Excel file containing all of this data is available [here](https://github.com/joshnoonan/complete-quarter-shooting/blob/master/data/completeshooting9619.xlsx). A Tableau Visualization for every season is available [here](https://public.tableau.com/profile/josh.noonan#!/vizhome/allbubbles/Sheet1?publish=yes).
