---
layout: post
title: The Best Shooting NBA Teams By Quarter
---

Dread it. Run from it. “The third quarter Warriors” arrive all the same. 

The talking heads of the sports world love talking about the infamous “third quarter run” of the Golden State Warriors, but what exactly does this mean? Does it even exist? Are they really that special? (Spoiler alert: they are)

There is perhaps no greater example of the third quarter Warriors than the display they put on this in Toronto during Game 2 of the NBA Finals. The Warriors shot 48.1% overall from the field, and a flaming 57.1% from downtown, in the midst of an 18-0 run that took every bit of wind out of the Raptors’ sails. Shockingly, the Warrior somehow managed to post a worse shooting percentage in this third quarter compared to their average third quarter from the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 seasons. On average, the Warriors are going to shellack you in the third quarter to the tune of 50.7% shooting from the field, a mark that generates a z-score of 2.776 (that’s nearly three standard deviations above the mean!). The Warriors easily perform better than any other team in the third quarter, with their closest competition being the Milwaukee Bucks at 49.5% for the quarter and a z-score of 2.029. (For those uncomfortable with what a z-score is - check out this link: http://www.indiana.edu/~educy520/sec6342/week_09/z_score_intro.pdf)

The Warriors are obviously the best third quarter team of the past two seasons, but what teams take the cake in the other three quarters? The Philadelphia 76ers take the crown for the first quarter, very narrowly posting a better shooting percentage than the Warriors (who else!) at 50.462% versus 50.456% for the Warriors (note: this difference is constituted by only a handful of shots, we can effectively view the teams as equals during the first quarter). The New Orleans Pelicans are the kings of the second quarter with a shooting percentage of 50.1%, which is good for a z-score of 2.167. The Warriors obviously rule the third quarter, and the Los Angeles Clippers can declare themselves champions of the fourth quarter given their 47.8% shooting percentage and 1.99 z-score.

I’ve included an interactive visualization of every team’s performance in each quarter, quantified by shooting percentage and z-score. The (small) differences in the size of the dots represent the differences in shooting percentage - a larger dot means a greater shooting percentage. The color of the dots corresponds to z-score - deeper blues mean a lower z-score (icy shooting performance compared to average) while deeper oranges mean a higher z-score (red hot performances). Feel free to click around and look for your favorite team, hopefully they’re better off than my Hornets!

[Click here to explore the visualization created on Tableau](https://us-east-1.online.tableau.com/t/joshnoonan/views/quarterstats_2/Sheet1?:showVizHome=no&:embed=true)

All data was taken from stats.nba.com and manipulated via Python and its many open source libraries
